CHAPTER I 


He lay flat on the brown, pine-needle floor of the forest, his chin 
on his folded arms, and high overhead the vvir.>_ blew in the tops 
of the pine trees. The mountainside sloped gently where he la} ; 
but below it was steep and he could see the dark of the oiled road 
winding through the pass. There was a stream alongside the road 
and tar down the pass he saw a mill beside the stream and the 
falling water of the dam, white in the summer sunlight, 

‘Is that the mill?’ he asked. 

‘Yes.’ 

‘I do not remember it.’ 

‘It was built since you were here. The old mill is farther down; 
much below' the pass.’ 

He spread the photostated military map out on the forest floor 
and looked at it carefully. The old man looked over his shoulder. 
He was a short and solid old man in a black peasant’s smock and 
grey iron-stiff trousers and he wore rope- soled shoes. He was 
breathing heavily from the climb and his hand rested on one of 
the two heavy packs they had been carrying. 

‘Then you cannot see the bridge from here?’ 

‘No,’ the old man said. ‘This is the easy country of the pass 
where the stream flows gently. Below, where the road turns out 
of sight in the trees, it drops suddenly and there is a steep gorge 

‘I remember.’ 

‘Across the gorge is the bridge.’ 

‘And where are their posts?’ 

‘There is a post at the mill that you see there.’ 

The young man, who was studying the country; took his glasses 
from the pocket of his faded, khaki flannel shirt, wiped the lenses 
with a handkerchief, screwed the eyepieces around until theboards 
of the mill showed suddenly clearly and he saw the wooden bench 
beside the door; the huge pile of sawdust that rose behind the 
open shed where the circular ’saw was, and a stretch of the flume 
that brought the logs down from the mountainside on the other 
bank of the stream. The stream showed clear and smooth-looking 

5 



in the glasses and, below the curl o£ the falling water, the spray 
from the darn was blowing in the wind. 

“There is no sentry. 5 

‘There is smoke coming from the millhouse, 5 the old man said. 
‘There are also clothes hanging on a line. 5 
‘1 see them, but I do not see any sentry. 5 

“Perhaps he is in the shade, 5 the old man explained. ‘It is hot 
there now. He would be in the shadow at the end we do not 
see. 5 1 

‘Probably. Where is the next post? 5 

‘Below the bridge. It is at the roadmender’s hut at kilometre 
five from the top of the pass.’ 

‘How many men are here? 5 He pointed at the mill. 

‘Perhaps four and a corporal. 5 
‘And below? 5 
‘More. I will find out. 5 
‘And at the bridge? 5 
‘Always two. One at each end. 5 

‘We will need a certain number of men, 5 he said. ‘How many 
men can you get? 5 

‘I can bring as many men as you wash, 5 the old man said. 
‘There are many men now here in the hills. 5 
‘How many? 5 

‘There are more than a hundred. But they are in small bands. 
How many men will you need? 5 
‘I will let you know when we have studied the bridge. 5 
‘Do you wish to study it now ? 5 

‘No. Now I wash to go to where we will hide this explosive until 
it is time. I would like to have it hidden in utmost security at a dis- 
tance no greater than half an hour from the bridge, if that is 
possible.’ 

‘That is simple, 5 the old man said. ‘From where we are going it 
will all be downhill to the bridge. But now we must climb a little 
in seriousness to get there. Are you hungry ? 5 

Wes, 5 the young man said. ‘But we will eat later. How are you 
called? I have forgotten. 5 It was a bad sign to him that he had 
forgotten. 

Anselmo, the old man said. I am called Anseimo and I come 
from Barco de Avila, Let me help you with that pack, 5 
The young man, who was tall and thin, with sun-streaked fair 
6 



hair, and a wind- and sun -burned face, who wore the sun-faded 
flannel shirt, a pair of peasant’s trousers and rope-soled shoes, 
leaned over, put his arm through one of the leather pack straps 
and swung the heavy pack up on to his shoulders. He vt orked his 
arm through the other strap and settled the weight of the pack 
against his back. His shirt was still wet from where the pack had 
rested. 

’I have it up now,’ he said. ‘How do we go? ’ 

‘We climb,’ Anselmo laid. 

Bending under the weight of the packs, sweating, they climbed 
steadily in the pine forest that covered the mountainside. There 
was no trail that the young man could see, but they were working 
up and around the face of the mountain and now they crossed a 
small stream and the old man went steadily on ahead up the edge 
of the rocky stream bed. The climbing row was steeper and'more 
difficult, until finally the stream seemed to drop down over the 
edge of a smooth granite ledge that rose above them and the old 
man waited at the foot of the ledge tor the voung man to come 
up to him. 

‘How are you making it ?5 

‘All right , 5 the young man said. He was sweating heavily and 
his thigh muscles were twitchy from the steepness of the climb. 

‘Wait here now for me. I go ahead to warn them. You do not 
want to be shot at carrying that stuff.’ 

‘Not even in a joke , 5 the young man said. ‘Is it far?* 

‘It is very close. How do they call thee ? 5 

‘Roberto , 5 the young man answered. He had slipped the pack 
off and lowered it gently down between two boulders by the 
stream bed. 

‘Wait here, then, Roberto, and I will return for you.’ 

‘Good , 5 the young man said. ‘But do you plan to go down this 
way to the bridge? ’ 

‘No, When we go to the bridge it will be by another way. 
Shorter and easier.’ 

‘I do not want this material to be stored too far from the bridge . 5 

‘You will see. If you are not satisfied, we will take another place . 5 

‘We will see , 5 the young man said. 

He sat by the packs and watched the old man climb the ledge. 
It was not hard to climb and from the way he found hand-holds 
without searching for them the young man could see that he had 

7 



climbed it many times before. Yet whoever was above had been 
very careful not to leave any trail. 

The young man, whose name was Robert Jordan, was ex- 
tremely hungry and he was worried. He was often hungry but he 
was not usually worried because he did not give any importance 
to what happened to himself and he knew from experience how 
simple it was to move behind the enemy lines in all this country. 
It was as simple to move behind them as it was to cross through 
them., if you had a good guide. It was only giving importance to 
what happened to you if you were caught that made it difficult; 
that and deciding whom to trust. You had to trust the people you 
worked with completely or not at all, and you had to make 
decisions about the trusting. He was not worried about any of 
that. But there were other things. 

This Anselmo had been a good guide and he could travel won- 
derfully in the mountains. Robert Jordan could walk well enough 
himself and he knew from following him since before daylight 
that the old man could walk him to death. Robert Jordan trusted 
the man, Anselmo, so far, in everything except judgement. He 
had not yet had an opportunity to test his judgement, and, any- 
way, the judgement was his own responsibility. No, he did not 
worry about Anselmo, and the problem of the bridge was no more 
difficult than many other problems. He knew how to blow any 
sort of bridge that you could name and he had blown them of all 
sizes and constructions. There was enough explosive and all 
equipment in the two packs to blow this bridge properly even if 
it were twice as big as Anselmo reported it, as he remembered it 
when he had walked over it on his way to La Granja on a walk- 
ing trip in 1933, and as Golz had read him the description of it 
the night before last in that upstairs room in the house outside of 
the Escorial. 

‘To blow the bridge is nothing,’ Golz had said, the lamplight 
on his scarred, shaved head, pointing with a pencil on the big 
map. ‘You understand?’ 

‘Yes, I understand.’ 

‘Absolutely nothing. Merely to blow the bridge is a failure.’ 

‘Yes, Comrade General/ 

‘To blow the bridge at a stated hour based on the time set for 
the attack is how it should be done. You see that naturally. That 
is you right and how it should be done/ 



Golz looked at the pencil, then tapped his teeth with it. 

Robert Jordan had said nothing. 

4 You understand that is your right and how it should be done,’ 
Golz went on, looking at him and nodding hi? head. He tapped 
on the map now with the pencil. “That is how I should do it. That 
is what we cannot have.’ 

4 Why, Comrade General?’ 

‘Why?* Golz said angrily. "How many attacks have you c tc n 
and you ask me why : What is to guarantee that my orders are not 
changed? What is to guarantee that the attack is not annulled? 
What is to guarantee that the attack is not postponed? What is to 
guarantee that it starts within six hours of when it should start? 
Has any attack ever been as it should ? ’ 

‘It will start on time if it is your attack, 3 Robert Jordan said. 

‘They are never my attacks,’ Golz said. T make them. Rut they 
are not mine. The artillery is not mine. I must put in for it. I have 
never been given what I ask for even when they have it to give. 
That is the least of it. There are other things. You know how 
those people are. It is not necessary to go into ail of it. Always 
there is something. Always someone will interfere. So now be 
sure you understand.’ 

‘So when is the bridge to be blown?’ Robert Jordan had 
asked. 

‘After the attack starts. As soon as the attack has started and 
not before. So that no reinforcements will come up over that 
road.’ He pointed with his pencil. ‘1 must know that nothing will 
come up over that road.’ 

‘And when is the attack?’ 

‘I wall tell you. But you are to use the date and hour only as an 
indication of a probability. You must be ready for that time. You 
will blow the bridge after the attack has started. You see?’ he 
indicated with the pencil. ‘That is the only road on which they 
can bring up reinforcements. That is the only road on which they 
can get up tanks, or artillery, or even move a truck toward the 
pass which I attack. I must know that bridge is gone. Not before, 
so it can be repaired if the attack is postponed. No. It must go 
when the attack starts and I must know it is gone. There are only 
two sentries. The man who will go with you has just come from 
there. He is a very 'reliable man, they say. You will see. He has 
people in the mountains. Get as many men as you need. Use as 

9 



few as possible, but use enough. I do not have to tell you these 
things.’ 

‘A nd how do I determine that the attack has started?’ 

4 It is to be made with a full division. There will be aerial bom- 
bardment as preparation. You are not deaf, are you?’ 

'Then I may take it that when the planes unload, the attack has 
started ? 5 

'You could not always take it like that , 5 Golz said and shook 
his head. “But in this case, you may. It is my attack . 5 

'I understand it , 5 Robert Jordan had said. ‘I do not say I like it 
very much . 5 

‘Neither do I like it very much. If you do not want to undertake 
it, say so now. If you think you cannot do it, say so now . 5 

‘I will do it , 5 Robert Jordan had said. ‘I will do it all right . 5 

‘That is all I have to know , 5 Golz said. ‘That nothing comes up 
over that bridge. That is absolute . 5 

‘I understand . 5 

‘I do not like to ask people to do such things and in such a way , 5 
Golz went on. ‘I could not order you to do it. I understand what 
you may be forced to do through my putting such conditions. I 
explain very carefully so that you understand and that you under- 
stand all of the possible difficulties and the importance . 5 

‘And how will you advance on La Granja if that bridge is 
blown ? 5 

‘We go forward prepared to repair it after we have stormed the 
pass. It is a very complicated and beautiful operation. As com- 
plicated and as beautiful as always. The plan has been manu- 
factured in Madrid. It is another of Vicente Rojo, the unsuccessful 
professor’s masterpieces. I make the attack and I make it, as 
always, not in sufficient force. It is a very possible operation, in 
spite of that. I am much happier about it than usual. It can be suc- 
cessful with that bridge eliminated. We can take Segovia. Look, 
I show you how it goes. You see? It is not the top of the pass 
where we attack. We hold that. It is much beyond. Look - Here - 
Like this - 5 * 

‘I would rather not know , 5 Robert Jordan said. 

‘Good , 5 said Golz, ‘It is less of baggage to carry with you on the 
other side, yes ? 5 

‘I would always rather not know. Then, lio matter what can 
happen, it was not me that talked . 5 


10 



‘I?, is better not to know,’ Golz stroked his forehead with the 
pencil. ‘Many times I wish I did not know my ,ek\ But you do 
know the one thing you must know about the bridge?’ 

‘Yes. I know' that.’ 

‘I belies e you do,’ Golz said. ‘I will not make you any little 
speech. Let us now base a drink. So much talking makes me very 
thirsty, Comrade Hordan. You ha\e a funny name in Spanish, 
Comrade Hordownd 

‘Flow do you say Golz in Spanish. Comrade General?’ 

''Hot zed said Golz grinning, making the 'ound deep in his 
throat as though hawking with a bad cold. ‘Hotze/ he croaked. 
‘Comrade Heneral Khotze. If I had known, how they pronounced 
Golz in Spanish I would pick me out a better name hetore I come 
to war here. When I think I come to command a dh is ion and I 
can pick out any name I want and I pick out Hotze. Heneral 
Hotze. Now it is too late to change. How do you like partisan 
work?’ It was the Russian term for guerrilla work behind the 
lines. 

‘Very much,’ Robert Jordan said. He grinned. ‘It is very 
healthy in the open aird 

‘I like it very much when I was your age, too/ Golz said. ‘They 
tell me you blow bridges very well. Very scientific. It Is only hear- 
say. I have never seen you do anything myself. Maybe nothing 
e\er happens really. You really blow them? * He was teasing now. 
‘Drink this.’ He handed the glass of Spanish brandy to Robert 
Jordan. ‘You really blow them?’ 

‘Sometimes.’ 

‘You better not have any sometimes on this bridge. No, let us 
not talk any more about this bridge. You understand enougf^now 
about that bridge. We are very serious, so we can make very strong 
jokes. Look, do you have many girls on the other side of the lines? ’ 

‘No, there is no time for girls.’ 

‘I do not agree. The more irregular the service, the more 
irregular the life. You have very irregular service. Also you need 
a haircut.’ 

‘I have my hair cut as it needs it,’ Robert Jordan said. He would 
be damned if he would have his head shaved like Golz. ‘I have 
enough to think about without girls,’ he said sullenly. 

‘What sort of uniform am I supposed to wear?’ Robert Jordan 
asked. 



‘None/ Golz said. ‘Your haircut is all right. I tease you. You 
are very different from me,’ Golz had said and filled up the 
glasses again. 

‘You never think about only girls. I never think at all. Why 
should I? I am General Sovietique . I never think. Do not try to 
trap me into thinking.’ 

Someone on his staff, sitting.on a chair working over a map on - 
a drawing board, growled at him in the language Robert Jordan 
did not understand. 

‘Shut up/ Golz had said, in English. ‘I joke if I want. I am so 
serious is why I can joke. Now drink this and then go. You under- 
stand, huh?’ 

‘Yes/ Robert Jordan had said. ‘I understand.’ 

They had shaken hands and he had saluted and gone out to 
the staff car where the old man was waiting asleep and in that car 
they had ridden over the road past Guadarrama, the old man still 
asleep, and up the Navacerrada road to the Alpine Club hut 
where he, Robert Jordan, slept for three hours before they started. 

That was the last he had seen of Golz with his strange white 
face that never tanned, his hawk eyes, the big nose and thin lips 
and the shaven head crossed with wrinkles and with scars. To- 
morrow night they would be outside the Escorial in the dark 
along the road; the long lines of trucks loading the infantry in 
the darkness; the men, heavy loaded, climbing up into the trucks; 
the machine-gun sections lifting their guns into the trucks; the 
tanks being run up on the skids on to the long-bodied tank trucks; 
pulling the Division out to move them in the night for the attack 
on the pass. He would not think about that. That was not his 
business. That was Golz’s business. He had only one thing to do 
and that was what he should think about and he must think it 
out clearly and take everything as it came along, and not worry. 
To worry was as bad as tohe afraid. It simply made things more 
difficult. 

He sat now by the stream watching the clear water flowing be- 
tween the rocks and, across the stream, he noticed there was a 
thick bed of watercress. He crossed the stream, picked a double 
handful, washed the muddy roots clean in the current and then 
sat down again beside his pack and ate the clean, cool green leaves 
and the crisp, peppery-tasting stalks. He knelt by the stream and, 
pushing his automatic pistol around on his belt to the small of 



his back so that it would not be wet, he lowered himself with a 
hand on each of two boulders and drank from the stream. The 
water was achingly cold. 

Pushing himself up on his hands he turned his head and saw 
the old man coming down the ledge. With him was another man, 
also in a black peasant’s smock and the dark grey trousers that 
were almost a uniform in that province, wearing rope-soled shoes 
and with a carbine slung over his back. This man was bareheaded. 
The two of them came scrambling down the rock like goats. 

They came up to him and Robert Jordan got to his feet. 

‘ Salud , C amar ada> he said to the man with the carbine and 
smiled. 

‘ Salud ,’ the other said, grudgingly. Robert Jordan looked at 
the man’s heavy, beard-stubbled face. It was almost round and 
his head was round and set close on his shoulders. His eyes were 
small and set too wide apart and his ears were small and set close 
to his head. He was a heavy man about five feet ten inches tall and 
his hands and feet were large. His nose had been broken and his 
mouth was cut at one corner and the line of the scar across the 
upper lip and lower jaw showed through the growth of beard 
over his face. 

The old man nodded his head at this man and smiled. 

‘He is the boss here,’ he grinned, then flexed his arms as though 
to make the muscles stand out and looked at the man with the 
carbine in half-mocking admiration. ‘A very strong man.’ 

‘I can see it,’ Robert Jordan said and smiled again. He did not 
like the look of this man and inside himself he was not smiling at 
all. 

‘What have you to justify your identity?’ asked the man with 
the carbine. 

Robert Jordan unpinned a safety pin that ran through his 
pocket flap and took a folded paper out of the left breast pocket of 
his flannel shirt and handed it to the man, who opened it, looked 
at it doubtfully, and turned it in his hands. 

So he cannot read, Robert Jordan noted. 

‘Look at the seal,’ he said. 

The old man pointed to the seal and the man with the carbine 
studied it, turning it in his fingers. 

‘What seal is that?’ 

‘Have you never seen it?’ 



‘No/ 

‘There are two/ said Robert Jordan. ‘One is the service 

o£ the military intelligence. The other is the General Staff/ 

‘Yes, I have seen that seal before. But here no one commands 
but me/ the other said sullenly. ‘What have you in the packs?’ 

‘Dynamite/ the old man said proudly. ‘Last night we crossed 
the lines in the dark and all day we have carried this dynamite 
over the mountain/ 

‘I can use dynamite/ said the man with the carbine. He handed 
back the paper to Robert Jordan and looked him over. ‘Yes. I 
have use for dynamite. How much have you brought me?’ 

‘I have brought you no dynamite/ Robert Jordan said to him 
evenly. ‘The dynamite is for another purpose. What is your 
name?’ 

‘What is that to you ? ’ 

‘He is Pablo/ said the old man. The man with the carbine 
looked at them both sullenly, 

‘Good. I have heard much good of you/ said Robert Jordan. 

‘What have you heard of me?’ asked Pablo. 

‘I have heard that you are an excellent guerrilla leader, that you 
are loyal to the republic and prove your loyalty through your acts, 
and that you are a man both serious and valiant. I bring you 
greetings from the General Staff/ 

‘Where did you hear all this?’ asked Pablo. Robert Jordan 
registered that he was not taking any of the flattery. 

‘I heard it from Buitrago to the Escorial/ he said, naming all 
the stretch of country on the other side of the lines. 

‘I know no one in Buitrago nor in Escorial/ Pablo told him. 

‘T^iere are many people on the other side of the mountains who 
were not there before. Where are you from ? ’ 

‘Avila. What are you going to do with the dynamite?’ 

‘Blow up a bridge.’ 

‘What bridge?’ 

‘That is my business/ 

‘If it is in this territory, it is my business. You cannot blow 
bridges close to where you live. You must live in one place and 
operate in another. I know my business. One who is alive, now, 
after a year, knows his business/ 

‘This is my business/ Robert Jordan said. ‘We can discuss it 
together. Do you wish to help us with the sacks? ’ 

14 



‘No,’ said Pablo and shook his head. 

The old man turned toward him suddenly and spoke rapidly 
and furiously in a dialect that Robert Jordan could just follow. It 
was like reading Quevedo. Anselmo was speaking old Castilian 
and it went something like this, ‘Art thou a brute? Yes. Art thou 
a beast? Yes, many times. Hast thou a brain? Nay. None. Now 
we come for something of consummate importance and thee, 
with thy dwelling place to be undisturbed, puts thy fox-hole be- 
fore the interests of humanity. Before the interests of thy people. 
I this and that in the this and that of thy father. I this and that and 
that in thy this. Pic\ up that bag. 9 

Pablo looked down. 

‘Every one has to do what he can do according to how it can be 
truly done,’ he said. ‘I live here and I operate beyond Segovia. If 
you make a disturbance here, we will be hunted out of these 
mountains. It is only by doing nothing here that we are able to 
live in these mountains. It is the principle of the fox/ 

‘Yes,’ said Anselmo bitterly. ‘It is the principle of the fox when 
we need the wolf/ 

‘I am more wolf than thee,* Pablo said and Robert Jordan knew 
that he would pick up the sack. 

‘Hi. Ho . . .’ Anselmo looked at him. ‘Thou art more wolf than 
me and I am sixty-eight years old.’ 

He spat on the ground and shook his head. 

‘You have that many years?’ Robert Jordan asked, seeing that 
now, for the moment, it would be all right and trying to make it 
go easier. 

‘Sixty-eight in the month of July/ 

‘If we should ever see that month,* said Pablo. ‘Let me help you 
with the pack,* he said to Robert Jordan. ‘Leave the other to the 
old man.* He spoke, not sullenly, but almost sadly now. ‘He is an 
old man of great strength/ 

‘I will carry the pack,’ Robert Jordan said. 

‘Nay, 5 said the old man. ‘Leave it to this other strong man/ 

‘I will take it,’ Pablo told him, and in his sullenness there was a 
sadness that was disturbing to Robert Jordan. He knew that sad- 
ness and to see it here worried him. 

‘Give me the carbine, then,* he said, and when Pablo handed 
it to him, he slung it over his back and, with the two men climb- 
ing ahead of him, they went heavily, pulling and climbing up the 

*5 



granite shelf and over its upper edge to where there was a green 
clearing in the forest. 

They skirted the edge of the litde meadow and Robert Jordan, 
striding easily now without the pack, the carbine pleasantly rigid 
over his shoulder after the heavy, sweating pack weight, noticed 
that the grass was cropped down in several places and signs that 
picket pins had been driven into the earth. He could see a trail 
through the grass where horses had been led to the stream to 
drink and there was the fresh manure of several horses. They 
picket them here to feed at night and keep them out of sight in 
the timber in the daytime, he thought. I wonder how many horses 
this Pablo has? 

He remembered now noticing, without realizing it, that Pablo’s 
trousers were worn soapy shiny in the knees and thighs. I wonder 
if he has a pair of boots or if he rides in those alpargatas , he 
thought. He must have quite an outfit. But I don’t like that sad- 
ness, he thought. That sadness is bad. That’s the sadness they get 
before they quit or before they betray. That is the sadness that 
comes before the sell-out. 

Ahead of them a horse whinnied in the timber and then, 
through the brown trunks of the pine trees, only a little sunlight 
coming down through their thick, almost-touching tops, he saw 
the corral made by roping around the tree trunks. The horses had 
their heads pointed toward the men as they approached, and at 
the foot of a tree, outside the corral, the saddles were piled to- 
gether and covered with a tarpaulin. 

As they came up, the two men with the packs stopped, and 
Robert Jordan knew it was for him to admire the horses. 

‘Yes,’ he said. ‘They are beautiful.’ He turned to Pablo. ‘You 
have your cavalry and all.’ 

There were five horses in the rope corral, three bays, a sorrel, 
and a buckskin. Sorting them out carefully with his eyes after he 
had seen them first together, Robert Jordan looked them over in- 
dividually. Pablo and Anselmo knew how good they were and 
while Pablo stood now proud and less sad-looking, watching them 
lovingly, the old man acted as though they were some great sur- 
prise that he had produced, suddenly, himself. 

‘How do they look to you? ’ he asked. 

‘All these I have taken,’ Pablo said and Robert Jordan was 
pleased to hear him speak proudly. 
